---
layout: post
title:  The Economic and Military Exploitation of the Arctic
image: ''
date:   2018-08-05 21:33:13
tags:
- environment
- arctic
description: ‘a research report written in early 2018’
categories:
- International Relations
---

**Question of:** The Economic and Military Exploitation of the Arctic: Minimising environmental impact

**Introduction**

Located at the northernmost part of the Earth, the Arctic has long been a subject of speculation and curiosity. Its unique environment and climate has produced incredible culture, animals and plants. The relationship of the human race and the Arctic is an ancient one: from Ancient Greek sailors to the first steps taken on the North Pole by the Soviets in 1948, explorations into the Arctic continues into the modern age, wishing to uncover useful facts and resources for the benefit of economy and society.

While the polar region itself spans eight countries and the North Pole, the natural resources that lie largely unused beneath the ice caps have garnered much international attention. As the supply of natural resources such as petroleum and minerals deplete while their demands rise with industrialisation, the world draws its eye towards the Arctic for more: an estimated 22% of the world&#39;s oil reserve lie within the Arctic, large mineral supplies of iron, copper and aluminum, large quantities of fish and 1/5 of the world&#39;s water supply are only some of the treasures that the Arctic holds. In recent years, the Arctic is increasingly accessible as marine passageways, previously full of ice, have opened to allow commercial and economic vessels to explore further, its newfound availability already a product of global warming.

It is clear that the Arctic will face increased exploitation in the future, yet the wonders it offers might become a curse instead of a blessing if not extracted carefully, keeping in mind the potential impact to the Arctic environment. Unpredictable climate changes in the Arctic own their occurrence to global warning; threats of cumbersome and potentially oil spills arise as companies begin to exploit the Arctic for fossil fuels; pollution and damage to local flora, fauna and indigenous peoples pose question to the establishment of fisheries and other commercial ventures within the Arctic. The world must seek a balance between economic gain and environmental protection in order to develop sustainably within the Arctic.

**Definition of Key Terms**

_The Arctic:_ The Arctic are the regions north of the Arctic Circle (66° 33&#39;N), consisting of the geographic North Pole, the Arctic Ocean and its adjoining seas, and some territories of Canada, Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway, Russia, Sweden and the United States. Despite its extreme tundra climate, the Arctic is home to unique indigenous peoples, flora and fauna. The Arctic also contains approximately 22% of the world&#39;s fossil fuels as well as substantial reserves of minerals and fish.

_Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ):_ The UNCLOS prescribes the EEZ as &quot;an area beyond and adjacent to the territorial sea, subject to the specific legal regime established in this [Convention](), under which the rights and jurisdiction of the coastal State and the rights and freedoms of other States are governed by the relevant provisions of this Convention.&quot; This definition applies to countries bordering seas and oceans. A nation retains its sovereignty below the surface of the seas within the Exclusive Economic Zone, with certain responsibilities and advised restrictions. The surface of the sea constitutes international waters. The further discussion of the EEZ can be found in the Previous UN Involvement part of this research report.

_High seas_: High seas, or international waters, refer to all bodies of water outside of any state&#39;s jurisdiction, which is beyond a state&#39;s 12 nautical miles of territorial waters (whereby all sovereignty is retained). The UNCLOS marks that the high seas are open to all States, coastal and landlocked; and that all states have the freedoms of navigation, laying submarine cables, construct artificial islands in permission under international law, fishing and scientific research with further conditions.

_Global warming:_ Defined by the Oxford Dictionary as &quot;a gradual increase in the overall temperature of the earth&#39;s atmosphere generally attributed to the greenhouse effect caused by increased levels of carbon dioxide, CFCs, and other pollutants&quot;, global warming has changed Arctic environment and in turn, the world&#39;s relationship with the Arctic. Sea surface on the Arctic Ocean, previously full of permanent ice, are now open due to increased temperatures, giving passageway to sea vessels and allowing for easier resource extraction. Global warming has an overall detrimental effect towards the Arctic&#39;s wildlife and peoples, one of its most obvious impacts being that shrinking ice surface area may damage the habitat of animals such as the polar bear.

**Topic Summary/ Overview**

One major allure of the Arctic is its abundant natural resources. Its unique ecosystem and climate - oceans covered by thick, permanent ice, tundra climate and harsh living conditions - means that not only is the area scantly populated, but that the majority of its natural resources have not yet been touched by anyone. These resources have previously been largely untouchable: it is very hard to pass through the Arctic Ocean due to its thick ice, and the extraction of resources there could be technically difficult. However, as a result of global warming, these permanent ice have been melting steadily over the past decades. The record lowest sea ice area of 3.41 million square kilometres was recorded in in September 2012, being 44% smaller compared to the 1981-2010 average. This diminishing of ice means that sea passageways will open up, and resource extraction will become easier in the future. This includes oil extraction, fishing and transportation practices. However, before any nation dive in to reap this change for their economic benefit, a comprehensive look on the potential environmental impacts must be assessed.

**Oil**  ** **

According to the United States Geological Survey (USGS) , 22% of the world&#39;s oil could be located beneath the Arctic seas. In addition to most of it being located in the ocean, this resource remains largely untouched in light of rising global demand for fossil fuels and diminishing resources elsewhere in the world. Historically, drilling for oil in the Arctic Ocean is heavily infeasible and challenging due to the abundance of ice, although the first explorations within the Arctic sea dates back to 1964. Recently, technological development and the melting of ice has further allowed interest in the oil reserves within the Arctic. The USGS had further estimated that 84% of the oil reserves within the Arctic lies in its oceans, meaning that if any economical oil extraction is to occur - it will happen in the Arctic seas.

The environmental concerns over potential extraction are numerous. While it is now technically possible to drill for oil, it is simply not possible to completely clean up any oil spills in the Arctic waters due to weather conditions and ice. Extreme conditions mean that in the event of an oil spill, due to slow communication and response, the cleanup will take much more time, money and energy to result in minimal success. Oil spills will cause further damage to local indigenous communities who depend on the ocean for food and are already suffering consequences of global warming, in addition to causing long-term troubles for marine life within the Arctic Oceans. Drilling for oil also causes pollution, both from the drilling/stationing itself and the ships that will pass through the area, further harming the local environment.

Different Arctic nations respond to these information differently. Northern American countries, the U.S. and Canada, have determined the majority of Arctic waters to be off limits to offshore drilling indefinitely. They are not at a lack of fossil fuel resources, as both nations have explored onshore drilling (fracking, etc). However, nations closer to the Arctic Circle - Russia and Norway - depend more heavily on oil for a bustling economy. Oil within the Arctic could be a means to sustain their economy.

In 1989, an Exxon Valdez oil tanker spilled 11 to 38 million gallons of crude oil within the Arctic seas near Alaska. The disaster became hard to manage since the site of the spill was located far from any response station. An estimation of &quot;250,000 seabird, at least 2,800 sea otter, 22 orca, and innumerable fish&quot; was impacted according to the Arctic Institute. To this day, an estimated 16,000 to 21,000 gallons of oil remain on beaches, proving the difficulty in cleaning up oil spills.

Since the 2010s, many energy companies such as Shell and Total have been exploring the Arctic for oil resources, obtaining permission from Arctic governments to do so. Shell has invested $7 billion USD into Arctic exploration for oil and explored many parts of the Arctic for oil in July 2015; while other companies have been building platforms or conducting surveys in their respective EEZs. This has attracted much controversy, especially coming from environmental organizations such as Greenpeace, who has since actively protested against petroleum extraction in the Arctic. Despite all actions being perfectly legal within EEZs if governments permit, Greenpeace believes that offshore oil within the Arctic should not be extracted at all.

The activism itself generated much controversy. In September 2013, two Greenpeace activists attempted to board the Prirazlomnaya drilling platform in order to protest oil drilling in the Arctic Ocean. The Prirazlomnaya drilling platform is located in the Russian EEZ, where the Russian government has given its permission to Gazprom company to drill offshore - it is the first offshore Arctic drilling platform. Being in the Russian EEZ, the field is also located in international waters, meaning that Greenpeace ships should be allowed free passage according to the UNCLOS agreement.. The activists, as well as the crew from the Greenpeace ship, were detained by the Russian government after the action. Initially, charges were pressed against the activists on the grounds of piracy and hooliganism. However, they were released two months later after an appeal to the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea by the Dutch government, despite Russia&#39;s initial dismissal of the Tribunal&#39;s ruling that the activists should be released. This activism appeared to have no effect, since the Prirazlomnaya drilling platform began operations three months after the incident.

However, a global surplus of oil in the 2014s resulted in the diminishing of demand for Arctic exploration. As oil prices fall globally, Shell abandoned its operations in the Arctic in September 2015, citing that the exploration is no longer economically viable. Cairn Energy, Total and Terzian have since all abandoned their operations in the Arctic. However, it is certain that the Arctic&#39;s untouched energy reserves will not be forgotten in the future.

**Fishing**

Fishing in the northern Arctic regions has previously been either impossible or highly unaccessible, yet warming climates have lead to melting of ice in the Arctic, meaning that fishermen could access many more marine ecosystems in the future. However, the sustainable nature of this proposition may be questionable, as threats of overfishing and dangerous fishing practices may cause damage to the local ecosystem.

Currently, no nations are fishing commercially in the high seas of the Arctic ocean, as knowledge on the areas is scant and the costs too high. Little is known regarding the species and habitat of fish in the Arctic ocean, other than the animals that prey on them (e.g. Polar Bears) and the plankton that they eat.

However, the biggest commercial fisheries of the U.S. are located within sub-Arctic seas where multiple species are caught for large corporations such as McDonald&#39;s. It is also worthy of note that some popular species of fish (such as salmon) are migrating towards the North Pole, seeking colder waters as the temperature of the world&#39;s seas continue to rise. This could mean that the Arctic Ocean may be a very profitable ground for fisheries as the world&#39;s fishing resources decline due to overfishing.

In March 2016, researchers from Greenpeace, an international organization that campaigns actively for the preservation of the environment, discovered an increasing number of trawlers in the further northern part of the Barents Sea. Trawling - using underwater &#39;bulldozers&#39; to catch fish - is a very destructive method of fishing which has known to be damaging towards corals reefs. This sea is located within the territorial waters (where nations retain full sovereignty) of Norway and Russia, and it is not illegal for industrial fisheries to be constructed closer towards the North Pole. However, the sea remains an important habitat to various species such as the polar bear and Greenland shark. It has since been revealed that these trawlers are fishing commercially for cod, a fish species that is sold to multiple global food companies - 70% of the world&#39;s cod comes from the Barents Sea. After the news is brought to light, the companies have hence [stated]()(https://www.greenpeace.org/archive-international/Global/sweden/Arktis/Industry%20Group%20Statement%2025th%20May%202016.pdf) that they will refrain from venturing farther north to fish.

In 2008, two Republican senators tried to push a resolution through the U.S. Congress after the Northwest Passage became navigable without an icebreaker. The resolution called for the U.S. to initiate international negotiations over the management of the Arctic high seas to prevent other fishing nations from damaging its marine environment.

This eventually developed into an international forum in November 2017. Members of the Arctic Council, the European Union, China, Japan and South Korea came together and agreed to prevent the establishment of High Seas Fisheries in the Central Arctic Ocean for the future 16 years, during which studies will be conducted on the impacts fishing on the Arctic environment. This agreement accounts for approximately 2.8 million square kilometers of ocean in the Central Arctic Ocean, a precautionary gesture to prevent any government from using this area to reap economic benefit. Notice were also given to the need for further scientific research on marine life and ecology in this area, whereby the delegations discussed a joint scientific effort to better understand the fishes and potential impact of establishing fisheries.

**Climate Change and its Local Influence**

While climate change has not been a direct environmental threat within the Arctic itself, it has strong links with all environmental concerns to occur. Global warming has resulted in the melting of Arctic sea ice, and climate change can be labeled as a cause of all future human ventures in the area since it has opened up passageways previously full of ice, making it easier to navigate the region.

Being a result of increased carbon dioxide emissions and increased industrialization, global warming has influenced the Arctic from a distance. This has disturbed the habitat of fauna and indigenous people within the Arctic region, as shrinking sea ice surface area means that their homes are no longer stable. According to research by WWF, polar bears who spend majority of their lives on sea ice are now forced to live on land for half of the year, meaning that the lack of food and distance from the sea turn them to face conflict with people as they attack communities for food and resources. The further exploitation of the Arctic could mean more carbon emissions locally due to ship&#39;s fuels and construction of industrial structures, which will hasten climate change.

The extent of long-term impact on global warming by future exploitation in the Arctic region, while not yet fully measured, will definitely result in further melting of the sea ice, which in turn will open up more Arctic regions to economic exploitation.

**Save the Arctic**

As a reaction to oil drilling and fish, Greenpeace, a NGO campaigning for the protection of the environment, has launched the _Save the Arctic_ campaign in attempt to raise awareness and impact government and corporate action. While largely peaceful, the campaign did meet some complications while protesting against the Prirazlomnaya drilling platform. The extent of influence the campaign has on the current situation is yet to be evaluated.

**Major Parties Involved**

**The Arctic Council**  **                                                                                               **

The Arctic Council is a high-level intergovernmental forum founded in September 1996, aiming to promote &#39;cooperation, coordination and interaction among the Arctic States&#39; as well as &#39;indigenous communities and issues of sustainable development and environmental protection in the Arctic. Its consists of eight members: Canada, Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway, Russia, Sweden and the United States, all of which contains territories north of the Arctic Circle. Apart from these members, six organizations representing Arctic indigenous peoples are given permanent participant status within the Council. Non-Arctic states and international organizations may also acquire Observer status to the Council. The following non-Arctic states are Observers to the Council: Germany, Netherlands, Poland, United Kingdom, France, Spain, China, India, Italy, Japan, South Korea, Singapore and Switzerland. The Council itself diverges into six working groups, each focusing on a different aspect of Arctic management (e.g. monitors the Arctic environment, ecosystem and people), whereby Observers may participate and give guidance.

It is important to note the **forum** status of the Council, meaning that it has no budget and that all projects will be funded by either the Arctic States or other entities. The Arctic Council does not manage military security regarding the Arctic, nor can it issue legally binding statements or guidelines.

**Russia**

Bordering the Arctic Ocean and containing half of all Arctic inhabitants, Russia is known for its plans to develop and utilize its Arctic resources. A member of the Arctic Council, Russia has historically shown interest both militarily and economically in expanding its influence within the region.

Russia&#39;s economy depend heavily on oil - it produces about 12% of the world&#39;s supply. Having extensive oil operations and shipping routes within its Arctic region and EEZ, Russia also suffers some environmental consequences. Its northern areas, according to a regional leaders, were left with oil residues and scrap metals from its fossil fuel operations. Oil operation within the Arctic has been very difficult so far for Russia, experiencing communication problems, setup issues and international pressure from organizations such as the WWF and Greenpeace.  Gazprom, a Russian oil company that was fined $1 million for oil spills in 2014, has hence went on to manage the first offshore oil drilling platform in the Arctic ocean, which resulted in the aforementioned controversy with Greenpeace (refer to the Oil section of this research report for more detail).

Many significant maritime transportation routes located in the Arctic waters are also under Russian legislation, and constitute a percentage of its economic interest. Due to global warming, Russian government estimates that these routes will have less ice and therefore experience more traffic in the future.

**United States**

Claiming itself to be &quot;an active and influential member of the Arctic Council&quot;, the United States has one of its states, Alaska, located north of the Arctic Circle. It is the only Arctic nation that is not a signatory of the UNCLOS.

The United States has multiple environmental issues within Alaska. Apart from the 1989 Exxon oil spill mentioned above, it also relies heavily on sub-Arctic seas for its fishing industries.

The United States is close allies with Canada, another Arctic Council nation, on matters of Arctic management. They are located in the same continent and have similar goals regarding the Arctic. Both has banned oil drilling in their EEZs and both have agreed to prevent fishing in the Arctic high seas.

**Greenpeace**

Greenpeace is &quot;an international organization that campaigns actively but non-violently for conservation of the environment and the preservation of endangered species&quot;. It has launched _Save the Arctic_ campaign mentioned above and continues to campaign against the extraction of natural resources in the Arctic, specifically targeting oil drilling.

| **Date** | **Detailed description of event** |
| --- | --- |
| 24 March 1989 | Exxon Valdez oil tanker spills 11-38 million gallons of oil in the Gulf of Alaska, damaging the marine environment. This is the first major oil spill in the Arctic seas. Some residue remain in the Gulf to this day. |
| 16 November 1994 | The UN Convention on the Law of the Sea of 1982 (UNCLOS) becomes effective upon its 60th signatory. |
| 19 September 1996 | The Ottawa Declaration of 1996 establishes the Arctic Council as a high-level intergovernmental forum, consisting of Canada, Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway, Russia, Sweden and the United States. |
| 28 November 2008 | The unaided sailing of the first commercial ship through the Northwest Passage (the sea route that connects the Pacific Ocean and the Arctic Ocean) confirmed by the Canadian Coast Guard, a previously impossible feat due to ice blockage in the Passage. A whole array of natural resources (most significantly, fossil fuel deposits) opens up to the world as a result of global warming. |
| 16 May 2013 | With the most recent addition of China, all P5 nations become either members or observers to the Arctic Council. |
| 18 September 2013 | Two Greenpeace activists attempted to board the Prirazlomnaya drilling platform in order to protest oil drilling in the Arctic Ocean, located in the Russian EEZ but also in international waters. The activists, as well as the crew from the Greenpeace ship, were detained by the Russian government. They were released two months later. |
| December 2013 | Gazprom, a Russian oil company, starts production in the Prirazlomnoye field, the world&#39;s first offshore drilling site in the Arctic. |
| 4 August 2017 | The United States formally announces its intent to withdraw from the Paris Agreement. |
| 30 November 2017 | Members of the Arctic Council, the European Union, China, Japan and South Korea meet on agreeing to prevent the establishment of High Seas Fisheries in the Central Arctic Ocean for the future 16 years, during which studies will be conducted on the impacts fishing on the Arctic environment. |
| January 2018 | The Arctic Sea Ice Area reaches a record low of 13.06 million square kilometers as a monthly average, as reported by the US National Snow and Ice Data Center. |

**Timeline**

**Previous UN Involvement**

There has not been any UN resolution passed regarding the Arctic.

[**The UN Convention on the Law of the Sea of 1982 (UNCLOS)**]()(http://www.un.org/depts/los/convention_agreements/texts/unclos/unclos_e.pdf)

The Law of the Sea treaty establishes the rights and responsibilities of nations in their commercial and political use of the seas, striving to sustainably utilise the natural resources of the world&#39;s oceans. It also outlines the extents of area management within the seas and creates procedures to prevent future conflict over territory claims and resource extraction.

The treaty outlines that state retain their sovereign rights (not to be confused with full sovereignty) within a 200 nautical mile Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ), where resource management are largely up to the state&#39;s sole discretion. Generic instruction on preserving natural resources and sustainable development are outlined within the Convention, although they may not be implemented. A coastal state can, however, extend these sovereign rights within the EEZ to a maximum of 350 nautical miles from its coastline, upon proof that the state&#39;s continental shelf extends into the Arctic&#39;s seafloor. A state has ten years to validate such claims upon ratification of the treaty.

It is important to note that the UN does not directly implement the Convention, despite the Convention being legally binding towards its signatories. The treaty has been ratified by 164 UN member states as of February 2018. The United States is the only nation in the Arctic Council that has not ratified the treaty.

**Possible Solutions**

Create more actionable governance within the Arctic: The current organizations or agreements regarding the Arctic are rarely legally binding, but instead advisory and precautionary. More actionable governance can be created by expanding the role of the Arctic Council, creating new legislation in international forums or creating an UN body to oversee the actions of member states in the area. Alternatives to international agreements should also be explored to ensure active governance, keeping in mind the existing legislation regarding EEZs, international waters and exercise of rights within these areas.

Empower non-national parties: Giving more voice and power to non-national parties such as representative for indigenous peoples and NGOs participate within international forums could allow for greater transparency and effectiveness in Arctic governance.

More UN Involvement: Apart from the UNCLOS, the United Nations has not played a role within Arctic management. While the question of extent of jurisdiction remains, creation of a managerial UN body, in collaboration with the Arctic Council, can allow for better communication and supervision in the Council&#39;s workings, as well as fund or supervise Arctic research and environment al protection.

Reform current legislation - Should the UNCLOS itself be revisited since the Arctic has changed so much in recent years? Should the concepts of EEZ be renegotiated, taking in mind the territorial claims and the extent of power it gives to nations? Or should more enforceable regulations regarding the environment be up to national discretion? Reforming the current legislation will allow the world to update its understanding of Arctic politics and its attitudes towards environmental protection.

**Useful links for further research**

[The Arctic Council Official Website]()(http://www.arctic-council.org/index.php/en/)

Access details and documents regarding the work of the Arctic Council.

[The Arctic Institute Official Website]()(https://www.thearcticinstitute.org)

The Arctic Institute is an NGO that conducts research on various Arctic topics, offers comprehensive information regarding Arctic countries and issues.

[Arctic Sea Ice News and Analysis]()(https://nsidc.org/arcticseaicenews/)

Comprehensive data showing the gradual decline of Arctic sea ice area.

[Save the Arctic Campaign by Greenpeace]()(http://www.greenpeace.org/usa/arctic/)

The campaign reveals the stance of environmental organizations on the issue and any potential conflict with international interest.

[The UN Convention on the Law of the Sea of 1982 (UNCLOS)]()(http://www.un.org/depts/los/convention_agreements/texts/unclos/unclos_e.pdf)

The full text of UNCLOS provides a helpful outlook on international agreement regarding the issue at hand. Attention should be drawn to Part V (regarding Exclusive Economic Zones) and Part XII (regarding protection and preservation of the marine environment).

**Bibliography**

&quot;About Us - Arctic Council.&quot; Arctic Council. 20 May 2015. Web. 14 Feb. 2018.

Aldred, Jessica. &quot;Major fishing deal offers protection to Arctic waters.&quot; The Guardian. 25 May 2016. Web. 13 Feb. 2018.

&quot;Arctic.&quot; State.gov. n.d. Web. 14 Feb. 2018.

&quot;Arctic threatened by environmental damage as the ice melts.&quot; China Dialogue. 30 Sept. 2014. Web. 14 Feb. 2018.

BBC News. &quot;Melting ice opens up potential for Arctic exploitation.&quot; BBC News. n.d. Web. 15 Feb. 2018.

Greenpeace International. &quot;Arctic Threats.&quot; Greenpeace International. n.d. Web. 11 Feb. 2018.

&quot;Environment and Climate - Arctic Council.&quot; Arctic-council.org. 13 May 2015. Web. 15 Feb. 2018.

Hoag, Hannah. &quot;Nations Negotiate Fishing in Arctic High Seas.&quot; Arctic. 28 Apr. 2016. Web. 13 Feb. 2018.

Oceanic and Atmospheric Research. &quot;Fishing in the Arctic?.&quot; Oceanic and Atmospheric Research. n.d. Web. 14 Feb. 2018.

&quot;Oil and gas in the Arctic.&quot; World Wildlife Fund. n.d. Web. 14 Feb. 2018.

&quot;Oil and the Arctic: what is at stake.&quot; Phys.org. n.d. Web. 14 Feb. 2018.

&quot;Oil in the Arctic.&quot; Aljazeera.com. n.d. Web. 14 Feb. 2018.

Pappas, Stephanie. Live Science Contributor. &quot;What Is Global Warming?.&quot; Live Science. n.d. Web. 14 Feb. 2018.

Rbth. &quot;Putin: Arctic Sunrise crew eligible for amnesty.&quot; Rbth.com. 19 Dec. 2013. Web. 14 Feb. 2018.

Smithers, Rebecca. &quot;Major British seafood brands linked to fishing in fragile Arctic area.&quot; the Guardian. 3 Mar. 2016. Web. 13 Feb. 2018.

The Arctic Institute. &quot;United States | The Arctic Institute.&quot; The Arctic Institute. 10 May 2017. Web. 14 Feb. 2018.

Welch, Craig. &quot;9 Countries and the EU Are Protecting the Arctic Ocean From Fishing Before the Ice Melts.&quot; National Geographic. 8 Dec. 2017. Web. 13 Feb. 2018.

