---
layout: post
title: A Discourse on the Concept of Environment and the Validity of Environment Value Systems
image: ''
date:   2018-08-27 19:14:56
tags:
- environment
- philosophy
description: ‘Written 24 January 2018 under 48-hour deadline conditions’
categories:
- Philosophy
---
From deforestation to social upbringing, from cultural relativism to identity, we are always eager to attach the label of 'environment' to conversations about ourselves, people around us, as well as the nature. It is fair to say that the topic of environment has permeated our collective consciousness, and one specific definition of environment - the natural environment - is growing even more relevant in recent years. Global warming and the potential depletion of natural resources further warns humanity to pay closer attention to its relationship and perception of its environment. From this, multiple Environmental Value Systems (EVS) have emerged, all of which argue for different perspectives on addressing the aforementioned relationship. 

As environment remains a political and inherently philosophical topic, I will attempt to undergo the paramount task of taking the variety of propositions regarding the issue into logical scrutiny. First of all, I will call the validity of the current definition of environment into question. Building upon that, I will then discuss the validity of contemporarily prevalent Environment Value Systems in regards to ethics and speciesism. Finally, I will endeavor to establish a logical approach to the relationship between humanity and the natural environment with regards to self-interest theory and altruism.

First, one must realize that it is impossible to coherently define environment. The multitude of meanings associated with the environment, from the natural to the societal to the ontological, had failed to produce any universal definition for this complex concept apart from a cosmetic consistency: the environment are the ‘surroundings’ outside of ourselves. The natural environment consists of all that is not artificially made; the social environment places emphasis on the individual and consists of all but the participant in question. With these definitions of environment, a noticeable commonality emerges: the definitions assume a center to the environment, and places that center in correlation to the environment. I define that center to be what the environment surrounds. 

However, the very existence of such a center is intrinsically contradictory to the concept of coherently defining environment: since the environment is only established in relation to the center, only the center is able to perceive or define it empirically a posteriori. Thus, the existence of any environment depends entirely on the center’s sensory, empirical perceptions. It is impossible to verify the existence of such an environment: no one can proclaim the existence of an environment or attempt to define it except the center themselves. Furthermore, the existence of such an environment is logical and sensible to the center only, since only the center can directly perceive such an environment. The environment is, therefore, unique in relation to the center as well as itself. Hence, it is impossible to define the environment for a plurality, such as the human race. 

Logically reaching this inevitably individualistic claim, we must hence regretfully abandon all present definitions of an environment. First of all, we establish that the only remotely possible definition of the environment will put humanity at its center. Establishing this, it is clear that no definition of the environment can be truly valid, since neither qualitative and quantitative perceptions of an environment by a person or a group of people will be able to account for all human race. Each definition of the environment intrinsically overlaps and connects with other definitions, since there are multiple centers to these definitions. Hence, there cannot be a singular ‘environment’ if we wish to speak from the perspective of the human race: there is no singular center in such a definition, as everyone perceives the world differently. Rather, the multiple definitions of environment are all approximated amalgamations of different ‘environments’ from direct empirical evidence of numerous people, and therefore will possess an inherent vagueness in all future discussions. 

Thus, while considering one’s relationship to the environment, one must realize that one will never have a coherent perception of environment beyond what can be perceived by oneself. This provides useful insight into the relationship between humanity and the natural environment: while one can study the natural environment from a perspective that places humanity as its center, one must be aware of the one-sidedness and inevitable subjectability of their knowledge before opining on it. With that, I would like to present a series of short examinations on the currently prevalent Environment Value Systems, which are paradigm windows from which many people choose to view the natural environment. 

Taking the Environment Value Systems into holistic scrutiny, we immediately see a certain complexity which is a potential result of the biased nature of our perception of the environment. Rather than being linearly graphed between one or two axes, the interrelationship between different perspectives are scattered across multiple axes, similar to that of a political spectrum. A diverse set of paradigms ensue: Cornucopians believe that we do not need to protect the natural environment since the Earth has sufficient resources for humans to consume, technocentrists believe that developments in technology will solve all the environmental issues, even if humans deplete natural resources. As an abundance of scientific evidence had proved that the Earth cannot sustain human development at the current rate, I will focus on two separate Environment Value Systems that both advocate for increased protection of the natural environment but differ in their methodology and reasoning: Ecocentrism and Anthropocentrism.

Ecocentrists believe that humans have no right to consider the natural environment in direct utility to themselves, since nature itself is at the center of the natural environment. Ecocentrists believe that mankind must stop its continuous extraction of natural resources and consumption of animal products, which is a reductionist outlook that places emphasis on stability, ecology and animal rights. 

While ecocentrism may initially seem compassionate and altruistic, it raises several questions that relates directly to applications of ethics. First of all, ecocentrism places the nature at the center of its environment. However, this is inherently flawed as nature is incapable of perceiving its own environment. No evidence has ever suggested that nature is sentient! Hence, this claim does not stand. In addition, the ecocentric outlook instinctively places human ethical values upon the living things within the natural environment - such as animals, plants, et cetera. Yet is this the right thing to do? Do ethics have any applications beyond the context of human society, and should they be applied towards species and non-sentient life forms within the natural environment? 

While contemporary philosopher Peter Singer had argued that the discrimination of other species - “speciesism” - is a result of humans giving themselves more rights than they give to animals, it is paramount to acknowledge the fundamentally human aspect of this argument. Despite the fact that plants and animals may not be able to perceive discrimination and do not possess human ideas of this discrimination, our perception of the existence of this phenomenon comes from the application of our moral values to members that are not a part of our species. It must be recognized that this is an one-sided concept: animals are not capable of recognizing speciesism. They may experience pain or loss of life as a result of human activities, but no evidence suggests that animals perceive the complex social phenomenon of discrimination the way humans do. Hence, they cannot associate systematic negativity or positivity towards the stimuli they receive. This results in an interesting premise: ecocentrists are fighting for the rights that animals do not know they have. Essentially, this condenses into a fight for preserving human values and beliefs endowed upon those beyond our species by our species. Despite this being out of good intention, it is nonetheless a self-interested, anthropocentric application of human ideologies, placing human morals as having a superior value that everyone should live by in the context of the natural environment. Since one can only perceive the environment in relation to oneself, the effort of ecocentrism to place the nature in the center of its environment goes back a full circle to a human intention. Naturally, this relates ecocentrism to a contrasting Environmental Value System: anthropocentrism.

The anthropocentrists are placed in somewhat of a juxtaposition to the ecocentrists. They argue that people should be placed in the center of all decisions regarding the natural environment: they note the growing capitalism and consumerism to be the underlying causes of potential deterioration, and advocates a managerial attitude towards manipulating the environment. The anthropocentrists believe that the natural environment must be protected for the benefit of the human race, which should be achieved by enacting protective policies and investing in environmentally friendly technology. 

Despite having strongly utilitarian and seemingly greedy undertones, I propose that anthropocentrism is logically valid: one cannot improve or worsen the natural environment apart from according to the criterion of humanity’s wellbeing. The natural environment, in itself, is not human. Therefore, one cannot apply the human quality of being able to perceive health or value to the natural environment. Thus, humanity can only view its relationship to the natural environment as being singularly beneficial to humanity itself. While here ethics is also applied beyond the human race (i.e. humanity must protect the environment), it is done in a manner that is directly relative to the human experience. Since one cannot view the natural environment as a center of another macro-environment, efforts to change the environment must be intended to benefit humanity in order to escape logical futility.

As I claim anthropocentrism to be the logical approach to achieve a balanced relationship between humanity and the natural environment, a swift counter-argument may arise: one may argue that anthropocentrism is as blatantly self-interested as ecocentrism is altruistic. However, the flaw in this argument lies in the application of the terminology. While anthropocentrism could be argued to be self-interested, it is clearly seem that this self-interest is the only interest possible in the circumstance, since humanity is the only party that could reap value from the course of action proposed by the anthropocentrists(the natural environment cannot benefit from the action since it cannot know what this benefit is). However, the supposed altruism of ecocentrism in this case works feebly without a human social context, since no other party are consciously aware of the concept of value and sacrifice at work in ecocentrist theory. Hence, this altruism again stems from a human emphasis on value and benefit. And since humanity is the only party capable of recognizing value in its relationship with the environment, this ecocentric altruism must be redirected, once again, back to human self-interest. In order to logically approach humanity’s relationship with the natural environment, one must examine anthropocentrism in relation to time. Long term benefits and short term benefits should be calculated and balanced in accordance with scientific studies to provide for a sustainable future and maintain continuous benefit towards humanity as a whole.

In conclusion, I have discussed the infeasibility of defining environment and questioned the validity of existing definitions; from which I then drew focus upon the natural environment to reason through various Environmental Value Systems, determining anthropocentrism as the most rational Environmental Value System that should guide the relationship between mankind and its natural environment. Throughout my argument I have taken the liberty to simplify this relationship between the natural environment and humanity to be two-sided and independent from external influences, however the reader should be aware that this relationship cannot exist without various other aforementioned “environments” (e.g. the social environment) exerting influence upon it. With greater fluidity in its philosophical connotations and further rational examinations, the concept of environment shall continue to develop and adapt in relation to changing times.
